# 2.1 – 2.9 – How Markets Work

**Economy:** an area where people and firms produce, trade and consume goods and services. This can vary in size- from your local town to your country, or the globe itself.

#### **Microeconomics and Macroeconomics**

**Microeconomics** is the study of individual markets. For example: studying the effect of a price change on the demand for a good. Microeconomic decision makers are producers and consumers (who directly operate in markets)

**Macroeconomics** is the study of an entire economy, as a whole. Examples include studying the total size of the economy or the unemployment rate, among other things. Macroeconomic decisions are made by the government of the particular economy – a town, state or country)

### **The Role of Markets in Allocating Resources**

**Resource allocation:** the way in which economies decide what goods and services to provide, how to produce them and who to produce them for.  
These questions- **what to produce, how to produce, and for whom to produce** – are termed **‘the basic economic questions’**. In short, resource allocation is the way in which economies solve the three basic economics questions.

**Market** is any set of arrangement that brings together all the producers and consumers of a good or service, so they may engage in exchange. Example: a market for soft drinks.

Goods and services are bought and sold in a market at an equilibrium price where demand and supply are equal. This is called the price mechanism. It helps answer the three basic economic questions. Producers will produce the good that consumers demand the most, it will be produced in a way that is cost-efficient, and will be produced for those who are willing and able to buy the product. More on these topics below:

### **Demand**

**Demand is the want and willingness of consumers to buy a good or services at a given price.** Effective demand is where the willingness to buy is backed by the ability to pay. For example, when you want a laptop but you don’t have the money, it is called demand. When you do have the money to buy it, it is called effective demand.  
The effective demand for a particular good or service is called **quantity demanded**.**  
**(**Individual demand** is the demand from one consumer, while **market demand** for a product is the total (aggregate) demand for the product, or the sum of all individual demands of consumers).

**The law of demand** states that **an increase in price leads to a decrease in demand, and a decrease in price leads to an increase in demand** (it’s an inverse relationship between price and demand. However it’s worth noting that an increase in demand leads to an increase in price and a decrease in demand leads to a decrease in price. The law of demand is established with respect to changes in price, not demand, hence the difference).

This is an example of a demand curve for Coca-Cola.  
Here, a decrease in price from 80 to 60 has increased its demand from 300 to 500.  
**The increase in demand due to changes in price** (without changes in other factors) **is called an extension in demand**. Here the extension in demand is from A to B.

In the above example, an increase in price from 60 to 80, will decreased the demand from 500 to 300. **The decrease in demand due to the changes in price** (without changes in other factors) **is called a contraction in demand**. Here the contraction in demand will be from B to A.

In this example, there is a rise in the demand of Coca-Cola from 500 to 600, without any change in price.**A rise in the demand for a product due to the changes in other factors (excluding price) causes the demand curve to shift to the right**(from A to B).

  
In this example, there is a fall in demand of Coca-Cola from 500 to 400, without any change in price.  
**A fall in demand for a product due to the changes in other factors (excluding price) causes the demand curve to shift to the left** (from A to B).

**Factors that cause shifts in a demand curve:**

  * **Consumer incomes** : a rise in consumers’ incomes increases demand, causing a shift to right. Similarly, a fall in incomes will shift the demand curve to the left.
  * **Taxes on incomes:** a rise in tax on incomes means less demand, causing a shift to the left; and vice versa.
  * **Price** **of substitutes** : **Substitutes** are goods that can be used instead of a particular product. Example: tea and coffee are substitutes (they are used for similar purposes). A rise in the price of a substitute causes a rise in the demand for the product, causing the demand curve to shift to the right; and vice versa.
  * **Price of complements** : **Complements** are goods that are used along with another product. For example, printers and ink cartridges are complements. A rise in the price of a complementary good will reduce the demand for the particular product, causing the demand curve to shift to the left; and vice versa.
  * **Changes in consumer tastes and fashion:** for example, the demand for DVDs have fallen since the advent of streaming services like Netflix, which has caused the demand curve for DVDs to shift to the left.
  * **Degree of Advertising** : when a good is very effectively advertised (Coke and Pepsi are good examples), its demand rises, causing a shift to the right. Lower advertising shifts the demand curve to the left.
  * Change in population: A rise in the population will raise demand, and vice versa.
  * Other factors, such as weather, natural disasters, laws, interest rates etc. can also shift the demand curve.

### 

### Supply

**Supply is the want and willingness of producers to supply a good or services at a given price**. The amount of goods or services producers are willing to make and supply is called quantity supplied.**  
**(Market supply refers to the amount of goods and services all producers supplying that particular product are willing to supply or the sum of individual supplies of all producers).

**The law of supply** states that **an increase in price leads to a increase in supply, and a decrease in price leads to an decrease in supply**(there is a positive relationship between price and supply. However it’s also worth noting that, an increase in supply leads to a decrease in price and a decrease in supply leads to an increase in price. The law of supply is established with respect to changes in price, not supply, hence the difference).

This is an example of a supply curve for a product.  
Here, an increase in price from 60 to 80, has increased its supply from 500 to 700.  
**The increase in supply due to changes in price** (without changes in other factors) **is called** **an extension in supply**.

A decrease in price from 80 to 60, will decreased the supply from 700 to 500.**The decrease in supply due to changes in price** (without the changes in other factors) **is called a contraction in supply**.

  
In this example, there is a rise in the supply of a product from 500 to 700, without any change in price. **A rise in the supply for a** **product due to the changes in other factors (excluding price) causes a shift to the right.**

  
A fall in supply from 500 to 300, without any changes in price is also shown. **A fall in** **the supply for a product due to the changes in other factors (excluding price) causes a shift to the left.**

**Factors that cause shifts in supply curve:**

  * **Changes in cost of production:** when the cost of factors to produce the good falls, producers can produce and supply more products cheaply, causing a shift in the supply curve to the right. A subsidy*, which lowers the cost of production also shifts the supply curve right. When cost of production rises, supply falls, causing the supply curve to shift to the left.
  * **Changes in the quantity of resources available:** when the amount of resources available rises, the supply rises; and vice versa.
  * **Technological changes** : an introduction of new technology will increase the ability to produce more products, causing a shift to the right in the supply curve.
  * **The profitability of other products** : if a certain product is seen to be more profitable than the one currently being produced, producers might shift to producing the more profitable product, reducing supply of the initial product (causing a shift to the left).
  * Other factors: weather, natural disasters, wars etc. can shift the supply curve left.

##### 

#### Market Price

The market **equilibrium price** is the price at which the demand and supply curves in a given market meet.

In this diagram, P* is the equilibrium price.

**Disequilibrium price** is the price at which market demand and supply curves do not meet, which in this diagram, is any price other than P*.

##### **Price Changes**

In this diagram, two disequilibrium prices are marked- 2.50 and 1.50.  
At price 2.50, the demand is 4 while the supply is 10. There is excess supply relative to the demand. **When the price is above the equilibrium price, a surplus is experienced**. (Surplus means ‘excess’).

At price 1.50, the demand is 10 while the supply is only 4. There is excess demand relative to supply. **When the price is below the equilibrium price, a shortage is experienced.**  
(This shortage and surplus is said _in terms of the supply_ being short or excess respectively).

### 

### Price Elasticity of Demand (PED)

The PED of a product refers to **the responsiveness of the quantity demanded to changes in its price.**

**PED (of a product) = % change in quantity demanded / % change in price**

For example, calculate the price elasticity of demand of Coca-Cola from this diagram.

PED= [(500-300/300)*100] / [(80-60/80)*100] = 66.67 / 25 = 2.67

In this example, the PED is 2.67, that is, the % change in quantity demanded was higher than the % change in the price. This means, **a change in price makes a higher change in quantity demanded**. These products have a **price elastic demand**. Their values are always above 1.

When the % change in quantity demanded is lesser than the % change in price, it is said to have a price **inelastic demand**. Their values are always below 1.**A change in price makes a smaller change in demand.**

****

**  
When the % change in demand and price are equal** , that is value is 1, it is called **unitary price elastic demand.**

**When the quantity demanded changes without any changes in price itself** , it is said to have an **infinitely price elastic demand.** Their values are infinite.

**When the price changes have no effect on demand whatsoever, it is said to have a perfect price inelastic demand. Their elasticity is 0.**

